Let's summarize some of the important concepts
that we've learned in this particular lecture.
In previous lectures we've covered the concept
of forward kinematics and inverse kinematics.
This is the relationship between joint angles
and the end effector pose. In this lecture
what we talked about talked about the velocity
transform. That's the relationship between
the velocity of the joints and the velocity
of the end effector pose. We've talked about
the derivative of the pose and we discussed
intangible terms what that might mean. It
might be the end effector translational velocity
xdot and ydot. If the robot's got three degrees
of freedom, then the end effector pose velocity
is xdot ydot and theta dot.
In this lecture, we introduced this symbol,
the Greek letter nu to represent what we call
the spatial velocity of the end effector.
That is the rate of change of pose with respect to time.
We've introduced this relationship between
the robot joint velocity and the spatial velocity
of the robot's end effector or tooltip. These
two quantities are related by the Jacobian
matrix. The Jacobian matrix is a function
of the joint configuration represented by
the vector Q. For the case of the two-linked
robot, the spatial velocity is simply xdot
and ydot and the joint velocity is the vector
Q1dot and Q2dot. For the three-linked plain
manipulator, the joint velocities Q1dot Q2dot
Q3dot and the spatial velocity now has a translational
component xdot and ydot and a rotational velocity
component Q dot. So if we think of the robot
end effector as a pose of a coordinate frame,
this is a speed at which the origin of the
coordinate frame moves and the speed in which
the coordinate frame rotates.
The Jacobian matrix can sometimes be singular
or close to singular. That is its determine
very close to 0 or its condition number is
very large. And this is something about how
easy or awkward certain Cartesian motions
will be. We will quantify this a bit by talking
about the velocity ellipse of the manipulator.
What we did was to map a set of velocities
that lie on a circle in the joint velocity
space to an ellipse on the space of the Cartesian
velocity of the robot tool; xdot and ydot
in this particular case. And what we can see
is we have an ellipse which indicates that
the robot is capable of moving in this case
quite quickly in the y direction but more
slowly in the x direction. The shape of this
ellipse is a function of the joint angles
Q. The inverse Jacobian is very useful to
us. It allows us to specify the spatial velocity
of a tool tip in terms of Cartesian coordinates
and determine the joint velocities that we
need in order to achieve that. This is very
useful in real world applications where we
might want the robot end effector to move
in a straight line at a determined velocity.
So for a two link manipulator, we define the
end effector velocity in terms of its Cartesian
velocity components xdot and ydot and compute
the appropriate joint angle velocities. And
again for the three degree freedom robot,
we can specify not only the translational
velocity xdot and ydot we can also specify
the rotational velocity of a coordinate frame
attached to the end of the robot. This is
really useful for Cartesian motion. And this
technique is referred to as resolved rate
motion control.
Finally we talked about how we can translate
a velocity defined with respect to one coordinate
frame to a velocity with respect to a different
coordinate frame. The two velocities are related
by another Jacobian matrix. And that Jacobian
matrix is a function of the rotational part
of the relative pose between the two coordinate
frames.